# Living in the World of Warcraft
By Nathan Lilienthal & Clayton Mentzer


## Introduction

Blizzard Entertainment launched World of Warcraft in late 2004, as the latest installment of the Warcraft real time strategy games series from the 1990’s. The game was immediately something of a phenomenon in the gaming community, and today it is an icon of nerd and gamer culture around the world.

The authors of this paper, Nate Lilianthal and Clayton Mentzer, have been World of Warcraft players for a number of years, and between them have seen first-hand a lot of what the game has to offer. Clay started playing in 2009 and has logged over 100 days in game with a focus on player versus player content. Nate started in 2008 and has logged over 300 days in game with a focus on player versus environment content. When it comes to analyzing content of this paper it's useful to understand the context of the authors in this light. The data collected over the course of the ethnography is a combination of personal experience interviews conducted with other players. 

## What is World of Warcraft?

World of Warcraft is a massively multiplayer online role playing game (MMORPG), or often just MMO for short. There have been a lot of MMOs that have been developed since WoW’s release, and a lot of people would argue that WoW isn’t as good as some of the newer ones. Nevertheless, WoW remains the most popular MMO on the market today, with upwards of 10 million active subscribers and 100 million different accounts created over its lifetime. In terms of man-hours, World of Warcraft players have invested nearly 6 million years of time into the game. WoW dwarfs every other MMO in terms of active player base, and while many people are just waiting for the MMO that “kills WoW”, none of them so far have gotten it quite right the way WoW has.

One of the reasons World of Warcraft has been so successful is that its roots go deep. The game draws inspiration from a myriad of sources that have all built upon one another back through the histories of gaming and fantasy, and almost all those sources have been quite successful. Perhaps one of the oldest lines that one can trace back from WoW leads to J. R. R. Tolkien, and his The Lord of the Rings trilogy. Almost all fantasy work today draws heavily upon Tolkien’s work, which should be little surprise considering how widely loved his novels are. WoW’s lore is extremely reminiscent of Tolkien’s work. The world is filled with fantastic places and races, each of with their own histories and cultures, and all of which contain a little magic.

By creating a world with as much depth and complexity as Tolkien’s Middle Earth, Blizzard ensured their world would be as immersive to their players as possible. Having a vast and complex world isn’t always a good thing, however. One of the common complaints about other MMOs is that the world is just too hard to get immersed in. It is too foreign or there is too much lore for a player to catch up on, or perhaps the lore is all presented to the player at the wrong pace. This leads us to a second reason WoW has been so successful: it built upon a franchise that the players already loved. The Warcraft Strategy games from the 1990’s had a large following prior to the announcement of WoW, and Blizzard was able to leverage the fact that there were already characters, places, and events that players of the Warcraft RTS games were familiar with when they were designing WoW. This meant that when WoW released and players loaded up the game for the first time, they already had feelings of nostalgia about the game. We know today looking at all the indie remakes of classic games how powerful the nostalgia factor can be when playing a game, and Blizzard hit video game design gold when they decided to throw their players into a world that they had already played in, and that they were able to immediately mesh with.

In the same way many WoW players came to the game with some pre-existing knowledge of the game’s world and lore, many WoW players came to the game with some pre-existing knowledge of the gameplay mechanics. Just as Blizzard drew heavily from fantasy sources and its own Warcraft RTS franchise when creating the world, they drew heavily from games like Baldur’s Gate and Dungeons and Dragons when designing the gameplay. Because of this, players who were already familiar with the mechanics of games like Baldur’s Gate and D&D immediately meshed with the gameplay of WoW. Your avatar in game has a race and class, an inventory, some set of skills or magical knowledge, and combat is at least partially randomized based on virtual dice rolls. The game is designed around a quest / reward system, where the player completes some series of tasks for a non-player-character (a character in the game not controlled by a player, an NPC), and that NPC rewards you for your effort with some kind of loot. All of these ideas are drawn directly from Dungeons and Dragons, and by taking these ideas from D&D Blizzard brought a lot of D&D fans into WoW. With them came some of the social stigmas associated with D&D players, as well as the kind of hardcore dedicated fan that could spend 6 hours a night 3 or more days of the week playing the game.

World of Warcraft has too many concurrent players to have all of them in the same place at the same time, the load on servers and player computers alike would be far too high. Instead, World of Warcraft is partitioned into separate instances, each on its own server and each identical to the others except in terms of the players. In this way the game grants identical worlds to smaller groups of players, meaning each player can feel more important in the world and smaller communities can form where players get to know one another. As technology has advanced over the past 10 years Blizzard has made changes to servers accordingly to improve the game experience. Servers are now grouped into clusters of servers called battlegroups, and there is some blurring of the lines between servers in the same battlegroup. Within the same battlegroup players can now pull other players from other servers into the same instance, allowing players on different servers to become friends and play together. In addition, players who participate in battlegrounds and arenas compete against any players in their battlegroup. The authors of this paper play on the servers Azgalor and Stormreaver.

## Our Focus

The intent of this paper is to call into question some of the stereotypes about World of Warcraft players, dispel some of the persistent misconceptions about the game and the world that it contains, and to investigate the differences between relationships that are formed in the context of WoW’s virtual space and those that are formed in the physical world. It is our belief that there is a lot of misinformation out there about World of Warcraft, the people that play WoW, and that virtual spaces have the capacity to generate interpersonal relationships that are as meaningful as those created in the physical world.


# Player Interactions

Along with the mechanical aspects of the game, WoW relies heavily on players interacting with each other in a variety of ways. These interactions are the foundation of the social structures that form out of the game, and this paper. As with all social mediums, there are constraints on various forms of expression. We'll look later at how players get act within these constraints, and how they get around the limitations of the system.

While there is no reason that WoW could not be played alone, the vast majority of players form connections with other players. Whether it just a simple "/wave" or a long term friendship, it is difficult to be an active WoW player and ignore the social aspect of the game. In this section we'll look at how the game does and does not facilitate these interactions.

## The Factions

There are two **main** social constructions in World of Warcraft, your faction, and your guild. While there are of course other social factors that play into the way players interact with one another, these are the most dominant ones built into the game. The reason factions play such an important role in social interaction is simple. You cannot communicate via text with members of the other faction. This leads to some interesting scenarios when one player runs into a member of the other faction. Particularly on a PvP server where players of opposing factions can directly harm one another. On these servers it is impossible for a player to engage the other player in conversation so instead, players utilize the in game emote system, which allows you to express yourself with a number of limited physical gestures. For example, it is common practice to show a player of the other faction that one means them no harm by "/waving" at them. By typing "/wave" into the chat window, a player can cause their avatar to wave at someone else. There are a number of emotes built into the game, but naturally it is impossible to use them alone to convey advanced ideas. The inability to communicate with members of the opposite faction is one of the many contributors to a general feeling of camaraderie that members of one faction share. It also contributes to negative feelings about members of the opposite faction. It is not uncommon for an Alliance player to justify "griefing" a Horde player by simply saying that they are Horde, so they deserve it. Inability to communicate cross faction makes it easier to dehumanize members of the opposite faction, and to treat them in ways that would be unacceptable in the physical world. Cross faction relationships are an interesting topic, and we will discuss it at length later in the paper.

The faction also limits your choice in guild, because you can only be in a guild with others from your faction. In that way the faction is the broadest form of social structure in game. Much of the game is played within areas (mainly cities) which are dominated by your faction. Cities have a trade chat system which, despite its name is mostly used for general communication. Trade chat is only limited to players of your faction currently in major cities, so it is usually a pretty large group. This draws a stark contrast to the guild chat described below.

## The Guild

The WoW guild is a smaller group within one's faction. Guilds vary in size, but most consist of around 20 to 40 active members. While it is possible to not be a member of any guild, almost all players belong to one. Each avatar can only belong to one guild. Guilds are entirely player driven, being player named, player moderated, and invite only. Naturally this leads to a large amount of diversity between different "kinds" of guilds. In general, guilds attract the kinds of players that are most like the players already in the guild, and form a kind of club or social network of other players that share common goals or ideas about how the game is best played.

Even more so than factions, guilds are a powerful force in shaping the way social interaction occurs in WoW. Where one feels a certain sense of camaraderie to their faction, that sense is almost always stronger between members of the same guild. In most cases, the members of a guild will be the each other's closest friends in the game, and the majority of objectives that require teamwork and commitment will be organized by the guild. It is not uncommon for members of the same guild to communicate more personally and in a larger number of ways with one another than they would with players belonging to other guilds, which is something we will discuss at length later in the paper.

Since guilds are player driven, there isn't any real limit to the number of types of guilds; however there are two that stand out. PvE (player versus environment) and PvP (player versus player) guilds are the two main types of guilds, and this is because they mirror the main endgame goals of the game. Some guilds do a bit of both, but in general there is a focus on one of the two.

The presentation of different endgame goals that offer similar challenge in an immersive and engaging way is one of the reasons WoW has continued to be so successful a decade after its launch.

### Player versus Environment

PvE consists of dungeons and raids, in which a group of some number of players work together to defeat a challenging encounter or series of encounters programmed into the game. This is much like fighting a boss in D&D, where a group of players is tasked with killing a much more powerful enemy.

A PvE guild doing the most challenging content in the game raids with 20 person groups. A large part of the challenge of the content is with organizing and instructing those 20 people. It is in many ways much like a team sport, with defined leaders, respected players, and applicants.

### Player versus Player

PvP consists of specific spaces in the game allotted to allow players to compete against one another. Unlike PvE, a player knows the capabilities of his opponents because they are limited to the skills and spells of their class and specialization. The more casual PvP zones are called battlegrounds, spaces in which teams of 15-40 people compete against one another to complete objectives like capturing the enemy flag or killing the enemy commander. Players can join a battleground alone and be added to a team or join with a small group of their friends. Battleground usually reward honor points, which are used to buy entry level PvP equipment. Rated battlegrounds are a more formalized and more competitive form of battlegrounds, in which teams are limited to 10 players and all of the players on the team must enter the battleground together. Arenas are one of 2v2, 3v3, or 5v5, and are generally considered the most competitive form of PvP. Arenas and rated battlegrounds award conquest points, which are used to purchase higher level PvP gear, and assign players a rating much like the way chess players are rated. A player's rating is used to determine the skill of the opponents that they play against, and some PvP rewards are only available to players with a high enough rating. Serious PvP teams can require commitment and practice the same way that serious raid groups do, and there are a lot of parallels in terms of time requirements and dedication to a physical world team sport.

On PvP enabled servers, PvP can also occur in most areas of the persistent world. This kind of impromptu PvP is called "world PvP", and is one of the many sources of spontaneous, unscripted conflict in the game. World PvP grants honor points like battlegrounds, but often far fewer points than a battleground would. Because of this, world PvP is often initiated due to some other source of conflict. For example, if there is a mining node that two players both want to mine, they might fight to the death over it. Similarly, if two players of opposing factions are attempting to complete the same quest they might engage in world PvP in an attempt to eliminate competition and keep the other player from slowing them down. Most of the time, world PvP is not balanced. Unlike a battleground where teams are relatively "fair", and both teams have the same number of players, it is not uncommon to see instances of world PvP where a large group of players from one faction "gank" a fewer number of players from the other faction. It is also not uncommon to see people calling for help when they are being harassed by members of the other faction, and because of this what starts off as a small open world skirmish can quickly become a full-fledged battle as more and more people from each faction come to help.


# Game Interface and Third Party Software

World of Warcraft attempts to give players a truly immersive gameplay experience, a large part of the game’s appeal is the ability for players to become connected to their faction, their race, their class; and to feel that they have an impact on the world as one of its inhabitants. A natural part of this immersion is to give the player the ability to do most of the things that he or she could do as a physical person in that world. It follows naturally that in order to give the players a huge amount of options about what they can do in WoW, the developers needed to come up with a lot of different ways for players to convey their desires into the game. One fantastic example of this is the emote system described in the previous section. In the real world, communication is not limited to only what you can express in English words, but is supplemented by body language, hand gestures, expressions, and so on. In an attempt to make the virtual space in World of Warcraft as “real” as possible, the developers added to the game the ability for a player to control his character’s body language and hand gestures, albeit in a limited manner.

One of the more common complaints about World of Warcraft is that the interface is just too complicated. Many new players feel that classes simply have too many abilities to keep track of, and that there is just too much going on in the user interface for a new player to pick up quickly. Serious players, however, know the opposite to be true. The game’s complexity is simply too high to be able to control one’s avatar in a way that is both efficient and subtle. For example, some players find it too cumbersome to type "/wave" every time they want to wave to someone, particularly if their hands are occupied with controlling other facets of their avatar, so they create a macro to type it for them. Taking this idea even further, it would be unreasonable to expect a raid leader to communicate instructions to other members of the raid by typing in the middle of a tough boss fight. For these reasons and others, most players turn to options outside of the game’s default interface to help them communicate in a way that makes the experience more natural, and therefore more immersive.

One way that users supplement the default game interface is with the addition of third party "AddOns". These AddOns are small programs developed by users to run on top of the game’s interface. By conforming to a set of standards that Blizzard designed into the game’s interface, these AddOns mesh seamlessly with the default user interface without requiring Blizzard to make accommodations for specific AddOns. AddOns do just about anything that a user could have thought to write a program to do, such as keeping track of damage sources in an encounter, changing the in game font, or giving the player warnings when encounter specific events are about to occur. The number of variety of AddOns is staggering.

It is impossible to convey certain things we take for granted in the physical world into a virtual world where text is the only means of communication. Things like tone and inflection cannot be conveyed in text, and in addition it is simply faster to talk and does not require one’s hands. For these reasons most players use some sort of third party voice over internet protocol (VOIP) program to communicate with their friends in WoW. Examples of these include programs like Ventrillo, TeamSpeak, and Mumble, just to name a few. They are similar to the household program Skype, but they are more advanced in a number of ways. For example, players almost always use some sort of "broadcast" hotkey, which enables their microphone for as long as the key is pushed down, similar to the way a walkie-talkie works. Additionally, players can change the volume that they broadcast at, and the volumes of other users individually. Giving users additional control in ways like these ensures players can manage a single channel (like a Skype call) with as many as 20 people or sometimes even more. Almost all guilds require use of these tools of their active members.

Interviews that were conducted while doing research for this paper were conducted in Ventrillo and Mumble. This makes sense, because the members of our guilds that we interviewed already hang out on the guilds' VOIP clients. Even though the entirety of the interview discussed just the game, it is easier to leverage third party software to communicate than it is to use the game's built in communication methods. Just like in Second Life, it is a matter of contention whether or not Blizzard should incorporate some kind of voice chat into the game's default interface. For many players, using voice chat is as much a matter of social importance as it is convenience. Most players would not want to voice chat with just anyone, and reserve that more intimate form of communication for players that they consider their friends.

As mentioned previously, the data used for this paper comes directly from the authors' past experience playing WoW, from records of chat logs, and from formal and informal interviews with members of their guilds. Interviews were either transcribed directly as they were conducted, or recorded as a sound file and transcribed later. It was quite interesting to hear players talk about the different reasons they play the game, what they get out of guilds, and things like that. It was also interesting to see how some trends applied to almost everyone who plays WoW. For example, almost all WoW players got into the game because they already had friends who played, and who convinced them to join them. As we progress through this paper we will discuss some of the results of our findings at length.

## Clayton's WoW Experience

Clayton first started playing World of Warcraft in 2009, about halfway through the Wrath of the Lich King expansion. He created a level 1 Draenei Shaman on the realm of Azgalor, a member of the Alliance. Like most players, Clay started playing because he knew people who were already serious WoW players and they convinced him to give the game a try. In his case, the people who convinced him to get into the game were his family, specifically his cousin Thomas. Thomas is a diehard PvP player, and is one of those players who just seems to have it out for members of the opposing faction. Because Thomas mentored Clay as he progressed through the early stages of the game, they came to draw enjoyment from world PvP in much the same way. Thomas and his guild mates were always willing to drop whatever they were doing to come help out when the Horde started causing trouble, and often ended up causing trouble themselves.

Not long after Clay reached max level, Thomas decided to take his closest in-game friends and start his own guild. He named the guild BearBlasting, and began recruiting any players who shared his love for world PvP, regardless of their skill or experience. As the guild grew, it became known as a community of players who were always accepting and always willing to help one another, and the reputation only helped foster the "family oriented" atmosphere of the guild. There were no real requirements to join the guild or stay in the guild, people mostly found Bearblasting through word of mouth and asked to be invited, and the guild had a very easygoing attitude.

This meant that BearBlasting was not one of best guilds on the server. Usually they cleared raids several weeks behind the fastest guilds, and none of the members had the best gear or the highest PvP ratings. It also meant that there were very few real requirements or commitments to stay in the guild. Members got together to raid whenever it was convenient, and battleground groups just popped up whenever people were in the mood to PvP. Gradually the guild got better about progressing and got more organized, but by the time the following expansion ended most of the members had stopped playing the game.

BearBlasting recently got back together at the start of the newest expansion, and this time the members have been a bit more serious about being a good guild. They still have the family oriented attitude, and anyone who knows someone in the guild and wants to join is more than welcome. The guild structure is pretty loose, with higher ranking members pulling not much more weight than new members. Every now and then there is some kind of guild drama, but for the most part people just play to have fun and there isn't much to cause trouble about. For Clay, WoW has always been more about the people that he plays with than any goals within the game.

## Nate's Experience

Nate started in 2008, playing a Night Elf Druid on the server Darkspear. Playing WoW was something he originally made fun of, but while on a backpacking trip in Copper Canyon, Mexico with some friends, away from technology for days his friends convinced him it could be fun. Upon getting back from the trip he made an account, and the character Epicgrim. And just like that the beginning of an era. Epicgrim has been Nate's only character through all the years he played. After a few years, the connection to the game and the character becomes very real. That connection adds to the immersion of the game, and excitement of accomplishing things in game.

Only a few months after starting, Nate joined his first real raiding guild, Relapse. It wasn't the most serious guild out there, coming in only about 10th on server, but he was new. Playing a healer he did his first few months of raiding with Relapse. After gaining some experience and gear, Nate decided it was time to step it up. The metaphor being from backyard baseball to the minor leagues. To apply to a better raiding guild is no easy task. It's very much like applying for a job. You must fill out a detailed application with information on yourself personally, and your abilities in game. Nate's application to Vox Radix, the server's best guild was over 4 pages long.

Being accepted to Vox Radix as a damage dealer (DPS), was a big shift for Nate. Vox Radix was a 4 day a week raiding guild. Regularly ranking in the US top 150s. Not the best guild in the world, but competitive. The transition to Vox Radix was from the casual guild was intense. Messing up a mechanic of a boss would result in being yelled at over Ventrillo. Messing up more than a few times would result in being kicked from the team. It's high pressure to perform. The guild leader is very much a dictator, with his word being law. Nate raided with Vox Radix for 3 years, and was easily regarded as one of the better players.

Nate has only taken one break from WoW, and that was in the fall of 2012. Mostly being caused by personal factors, and not rooted in anything specific in game. Leaving on good terms with Vox Radix was important, because it had been a group of people he'd played with for so long. This decision was surprisingly hard, and emotional.

Coming back to the game about 8 months later was a very different process then a new player would have. Much like the working world, having connections is what it's all about. Upon logging back in, all that was needed to find a guild was a message to an old friend asking if they could use a DPS for their raid team. Conveniently they could, and because of their connection, it wasn't hard for Nate to convince him to accept him as a trial despite his lack of knowledge of current bosses, and lack of gear. Nate didn't even need to fill out an application. The social aspects of the game are so much a part of the game. This guild, Party Shark, is the guild Nate is in today. Raiding only 2 days a week, but still relatively competitive.

In the section on guilds we'll look at the lessons learned from guilds, and how players interact to their own benefit and the benefit of the guild.

# The Community of World of Warcraft

World of Warcraft's community is one of the better communities that has built up around a video game. In our experiences, players are for the most part respectful of one another and often willing to help one another. This is likely because the social element of World of Warcraft has serious impact on how effective a player can be in the game, while in other games relationships between players only last the length of one match and players are effectively anonymous. This gives players a reason to be nice to one another, because in World of Warcraft if word gets around that a player is difficult to get along with that that player can have a hard time finding a guild or getting invited to groups. This also means that players in World of Warcraft are generally more mature than players of other online games. The average male WoW player is around 27, and the average female WoW player is around 32. Again compare this to games like Call of Duty, where the average player is between 16 and 22. This maturity shows in the ability of groups to work together effectively, in the general adherence to the game's social etiquette, and in the relatively small number of griefers and spammers.

The general trend of maturity in WoW players also shows in the game's demographics, which may also be impacted by the immersive nature of the game and by the hardware and software requirements of the game. Playing World of Warcraft seriously requires a certain level of time commitment, with the average wow player playing somewhere around 20 hours a week. It also requires a computer that can run the game, and the setup and maintenance of dozens of AddOns and third party softwares. This is quite different from a game like Call of Duty, which can be played with just a console and a TV, requires effectively no commitment (as games are drop-in / drop-out style matchmaking, and the world is not persistent), and has little to no social component. The stereotypical Call of Duty player is male, in his teens, and is quick to insult his fellow players, and because of this games like Call of Duty have been getting a lot of flak for being unwelcoming to players who do not fit that stereotype. Compared to games like Call of Duty, where ~16% of the players are female, as much as 25% of World of Warcraft players are female. In general, the authors of this paper have found the community of World of Warcraft to be welcoming of all players willing to work towards their common goal, regardless of things like race, gender, or class.

WoW etiquette is something that is learned quickly by new players, usually either because someone teaches them or because it is easy to mimic the actions of other players. As mentioned before, most players start playing WoW because someone they already know convinces them to start. This also means that most new players have someone to show them the ropes, and to make sure they know the appropriate ways to interact with other players. For example, it is considered impolite to invite someone to a group without communicating with them first, or to initiate trade with another player without first coming to an agreement about the conditions of the exchange. Players that breach etiquette are often "ignored" by other players, which limits their availability to communicate with the player that ignored them. Some breaches of etiquette, such as spamming a global chat channel or being racist or otherwise offensive, can have more serious repercussions. In the past players have been kicked out of their guilds or even banned from the game by Blizzard for serious breaches of game etiquette.


# Guilds

The guild is the tightest group with in WoW. They are formed specifically with the players chosen by the guild leader. Guilds often are organized around completing some tasks or goals. As mentioned before, the most common types of guilds in WoW are PvE and PvP guilds.

Working with other people is hard, and requires personal sacrifice and understanding. Some people learn these skills through team sports or group projects in class. WoW a lot like team sports because of the structure of the guild. Players who make the most effort to "step up" and lead or contribute outside of their own personal responsibilities are naturally respected and successful, while awkward or annoying personality traits often limit a player's ability to rise in the guild. These are forms of enforcing social conformance much like you see outside of WoW. Players who are are helpful or knowledgeable are often promoted, while players who are selfish or lack knowledge stagnate. The main lesson here is that it pays off to be an expert, and that it is socially beneficial to know as much as possible. This is obviously not always the case in all social structures. Nick Yee writes in "The Proteus Paradox", however, that in many ways WoW's social and Guild structures are similar to the social and business structures of the phsyical world.

## PvE Guild Structure

A guild is organized by ranks, with one guild leader. Generally this matches the social structure in the guild directly. The ranks break people into social tiers. Generally there is a single super leader (Guild Leader), then a small number of secondary leaders (Officers), the core group of players (Raiders), then random people who are just in the guild, but do not contribute to the goals (Friends). The one rank I left out is the Trial rank. This rank is held by players who are not yet trusted to be members of raid team, but are being evaluated. These players are directly put below everyone else on the social structure because they have not yet proved themselves.

The guild is able to accomplish tasks that a player cannot on their own, so there is a very real sense of dependence on the guild in WoW. This gives the guild some power, and control over the players. WoW raiding guild have scheduled you are expected to adhere to. Missing a scheduled raid is **very** bad. Attendance is one of the bigger points guild leadership stresses. Missing more than a few raids without a very good reason will be grounds for being removed from the guild. This again parallels team sports very directly.

Not all guilds are the same though. Some guilds rely on the single leader for everything, and meet feedback or suggestions with strong pushback. While other guilds utilize more leaders to organize the group, and meet feedback more openly. Feedback is very often a point of contention. Everyone has an opinion, and while sometimes there are good suggestions, just as often there are bad suggestions, and when you are raiding a limited number of hours a week, wasting time to people suggesting things is very detrimental. One of the most important jobs of an effective leader is to control the time spent on player feedback. Some guilds handle this by effectively shutting everyone down, while other guilds spend more time talking about feedback.

The best way to communicate feedback without eating into the raid scheduled is to talk outside of the game online. This is one of the purposes of the guild website. Like most communities these days, most guilds have a website for players to stay connected asynchronously through a forum system. This is used for strategic planning and random discussion.

## PvP Guild Structure

There are not any really competitive forms of PvP that require more than 10 people, so guild structure is usually a little different in PvP guilds than it is in PvE guilds. The ranking system is the same, but is often slightly more fluid. There is a guild leader, guild council or officers, and the core membership of the guilds. Most guilds usually have ranks specified for new members of alternate characters as well. While guild leader is the final verdict on things like membership, it is not uncommon to have the guild leader defer to other senior members for certain things, like leading the rated battleground groups or handling the guild finances.

Rated battlegrounds are the closest thing to raiding that a PvP guild has. Organizing and training a group for rated battlegrounds takes a lot of time and energy. Rated battlegrounds are only made up of ten players, but the space that the battleground occupies is large enough that all 20 players in the zone are almost never all in the same place. The battleground leader is in charge of keeping track of the overall state of the match, things like where players are and which areas of the map need support, and also of trying to predict the movements of the enemy team far enough ahead to be prepared. The rest of the members of the team are split into squads of 3 or 4 players, usually with 1 healer per squad unless someone like a flag carrier needs more support. Players must be ready to follow the orders of the battleground leader immediately but must also be capable of being autonomous enough to call shots for their squad or for their area of the map. In addition, they have to be able to work effectively with the other members of their squad. In a lot of cases, squads are put together from groups of players that already do arenas together, so that those players will already know the styles and strengths of their squad mates. It is important not to be too locked into the squad mentality, however, as the flow the battle frequently requires moving players between squads to keep everyone active. Communication is a big problem in rated battlegrounds, which is why the guild structure often goes hand in hand with the battleground leadership. One of the highest ranked members leads the battleground, with officers leading squads and members making up those squads. Communication precedence follows the same order. It is important for squads (which are often used to having just one another in an arena) to be able to communicate with one another but also not to clog the voice channel with chatter irrelevant to other aspects of the battleground. Because of this, battleground leader and squad leaders always have the highest communications priority. Rated battlegrounds parallel many stereotypically military approaches to leadership, because military discipline and order is undeniably effective.

There can be a lot more distance between players in a PvP guild than there usually is in a PvE guild. In a PvE guild, all of the members raid together and there is plenty of downtime between bosses to chatter. In a PvP guild, however, unless a player is on an arena team or a rated battleground team with the other members of the guild they might not have many opportunities to get to know one another. Some PvP guilds turn to things like world PvP to pull the members together. There's a lot more time to bond with other players out in the open world than there is in a serious competitive environment like a rated battleground. Other PvP guilds don't place a lot of emphasis on players getting to know one another. Instead, the guild is just a collection of players who all have their own small teams, and who can turn to one another for practice or advice.

# Powergamers

The word powergaming refers to a style of play became prevalent alongside the rise in popularity of goal and stats oriented role playing games. A person who is a powergamer is someone whose sole intent in playing is to make his or character as powerful as possible, with little or no regard for the more subjective elements of the game. A powergamer is someone who will find an exploit and abuse it for hours to get his character to a higher skill level quickly, even if it spoils the immersion of the game and isn't very fun. A powergamer derives enjoyment from doing the calculations to find out the most efficient way to level up, or the best rotation of spells to use, or the easiest way to defeat a difficult boss, even if these things fall outside the spirit of the game.

In a game like Dungeons and Dragons, this means making a magic based character so weak they cannot lift a bucket of water so that there are more stat points to put into intellect, or making a barbarian incapable of reading so that there are more points to allocate to strength. In games like the Elder Scrolls series, it means having prior knowledge of a hidden weapon and running there as soon as you start the game, or standing in a corner in a tavern casting the same spell over and over to increase your skill. These kind of players thrive in World of Warcraft. WoW provides on online world filled with stats and gear and boss fights and data, hundreds of ways a player can fine tune their play to make them just a tiny bit better, and makes that competitive. In WoW, a player can improve their gameplay by changing the order of his spell casts or moving out of a mechanic a few seconds faster, and at the same time have a metric for how good they are compared to the other players around them. There is a thriving community of powergamers built up around World of Warcraft.

T.L. Taylor writes in "Play Between Worlds" that to many players, powergamers detract from the value of the game experience. "Such players ruin role-playing games by their insistence on being as powerful as possible and 'seeing no other purpose in the game besides winning'". For many players, powergamers "push too much at the bounds of legitimate play ... [they] employ strategies that look like cheating or seem against the spirit of the game". Blizzard makes accommodations for people who feel there is more to the game than becoming as powerful as possible. Several servers are dedicated as "role playing" servers. Playing on these servers constitutes agreement to play as immersively as possible, even going so far as to place constraints upon the names that players can have for their avatars.

We observed one excellent example of powergaming with the release of Warlords of Draenor, the latest World of Warcraft expansion. There is often a kind of race among serious players to see who can be the first person to reach the new highest level after Blizzard releases new content and raises the level cap. Powergamers found out that a player can save up daily quests and wait to turn them in until the day after the level cap increases, allowing him or her to effectively "save up" experience and cash it in all at once. Using this technique allowed a few players to get a head-start on the leveling process, but the lead was so small compared to the time investment required that most players wouldn't find it worth the effort. To a hardcore powergamer, however, finding ways around the system by doing things like saving up experience for later is what makes WoW an exciting game.

There are powergaming communities online for both PvE and PvP. One good example of a powergaming community built around WoW is the PvE oriented website run by the guild Elitist Jerks (http://forums.elitistjerks.com/page/index.html). The Elitist Jerks website is a hangout for players who want to be the best at raiding they can possibly be. For most classes, this means maximizing DPS. On the Elitist Jerks forums are dozens of guides, spreadsheets, simulations, and discussions oriented around trying to solve the problem of doing as much damage as possible for as long as possible. There are also guides for specific fights and specific roles, discussing what each member of the raid should do at any point in a fight to do the most damage and increase chances of downing the boss. In World of Warcraft, things often change. As Blizzard collects data from the game and the players in real time, they make subtle changes to the mechanics of the game. By tweaking numbers on abilities and making small changes to fights, they attempt to keep the game fun and balanced for all players, regardless of class or specialization. A side effect of this is that there is always new things to consider for a powergamer. With each patch comes new simulations, new discussions, and new guides about how the changes impact how a player has to play to be the best. World of Warcraft is almost an ideal game for most powergamers.

On the PvP side, a good example of an online community of powergamers is the Arena Junkies website (http://www.arenajunkies.com). Arena Junkies is the Elitist Jerks of the PvP world, filled with guides and strategies for every class and every arena. Unlike PvP boss fights, which are scripted, arenas are much more reactionary. This means that instead of guides written for specific fights, Arena Junkies has guides written that contain general strategies for fighting each matchup. Because the number of combinations of matchups can get very high when you consider the number of combinations not just for the enemy team but also for the player's own teammates, there are a lot of guides. The players who frequent these two sites are often some of the best players of their respective areas of the game, and the fact that they are willing to discuss their techniques and contribute to communities filled with their competitors is just one more reason World of Warcraft is an amazing, constantly improving game.


# World of Warcraft's Virtual Economy

Not all players are power gamers, and Blizzard ensured during development that even those who played more casually could find places to excel in World of Warcraft. One such example of a more casually oriented endgame is WoW's virtual economy. Blizzard attempted to ensure that the world of Azeroth was as immersive as possible, and one way they contributed to this was by putting the infrastructure in place for players to generate an extensive virtual economy. There are several forms of currency in WoW, and several ways to exchange currencies for items and vice versa. One of the ways the game regulates how quickly a player can progress is by limiting that player’s access to a given currency. Some typical expenses that a player needs to pay for include:

- Purchases from vendors, including equipment or consumable items
- Transportation fees
- Training fees
- Repair bills, for when the player’s equipment is damaged
- Auction house purchases or direct trade with players

For most of these expenses, the currency the player needs is gold, the “money” of WoW. For more advanced purchases, including things like end game gear or trade good exchanges, the player needs some other currency like honor points or raid tokens. People gain wealth in WoW by:

- Looting gold from slain enemies
- Completing quests
- Selling unneeded or outdated equipment
- Performing services for other players, such as cutting a gem or crafting an enchantment
- Auctioning goods or equipment to other players via the Auction House or by informally trading with other players.

In the case of specific currencies like honor points (used for purchasing PvP equipment) or Apexis crystals (used for upgrading PvE equipment), players can win PvP events or complete specific endgame quests, respectively.

Each avatar in World of Warcraft can have two professions. In most cases players choose a gathering profession, such as mining or herb gathering, and a complementary crafting profession, such as blacksmithing or alchemy. Crafting professions allow a player to craft equipment, potions, or other useful items. In most cases, the items crafted by players can be sold to other players, and so the prices of those items greatly fluctuate depending on the supply and demand in the market. This means that having a lot of gold can give a player access to crafted items that other players cannot yet afford, which is one way that they can translate their virtual wealth to a real in-game advantage over other players. This means that while most players are okay with just having enough gold to get by, some hardcore powergamers consider having an excess of gold to be an essential part of staying ahead of the curve.

Still other players have no particular reason to amass vast amounts of gold, but consider it a fun challenge to leverage the in game economy and prove that they can make it big. Some players have even been able to create small monopolies on niche corners of the economy, such as a particular trade good. This is possible by monitoring the auction house, which is the primary means of exchanging goods between players, and purchasing the entire supply of that good before re-selling the goods for a higher price. This technique allows a player or group of players to eliminate competition by buying them out of the market.

Since prices of goods can fluctuate so dramatically, one technique many guilds use is to band together within the guild and pool their resources. By doing so, a guild can funnel unneeded resources to a player who can make use of them, and that player can craft equipment or items at a much higher rate than they would be able to if they had to go out and rather all of the resources themself.

Some players even turn to sources outside the game to increase their wealth in WoW. Julian Dibbell writes about the life of a Chinese gold farmer, someone who plays World of Warcraft to make gold in-game and then sells the in-game currency for physical world currency. This compares his time in the game to a full time job. Gold farmers sell gold at a ratio of about 10,000 gold to 10 dollars, but the person actually farming the gold only gets a tiny fraction of that. The game's virtual economy is so sprawling that farming gold employs an estimated 100,000 people, employees in a billion dollar market that spans the globe.


# Culture and Etiquette in World of Warcraft

## Avatar Presentation

Like many virtual spaces, World of Warcraft presents players with an opportunity to create themselves in a variety of images. Players have the ability to craft their in-game avatar in any number of ways, including choosing race and gender, which may or may not reflect their actual physical appearance. Wagner James Au reports on Second Life and other virtual worlds for a publication called New World Notes, and many of his observations about avatar presentation in Second Life apply to World of Warcraft. For example, he write that in Second Life a player’s control over the appearance of their avatar allows them to present themselves to other players in whatever way they choose. This essentially lets a player decide which preconceptions they want other players to have of them, which can be quite empowering when people are using to dealing with negative preconceptions in the physical world.

To a lesser extent this occurs in World of Warcraft as well. What race and gender a player chooses for their avatar can tell you a lot about them, some people choose to make themselves look as impressive or cool as possible in game, while others attempt to shock or disgust other players by making themselves as strange looking as possible. Why a player chooses a particular appearance can also tell you a lot about them. For example, if a player chooses to play a Troll because Trolls have a slightly higher chance to critically hit than other races, they are likely a power gamer who cares more about achieving results than role playing. Along the same vein, if a player refuses to play a gnome because gnomes look silly, even when gnomes are the best race for their class, then they probably place more weight on their characters appearance than on some small advantage.

Avatar presentation is an interesting topic in any virtual world. The fact that avatars are less customizable in WoW than in other virtual worlds means fewer players really think about what their avatar might say about them. While some players we interviewed said that their character’s appearance followed some kind of role playing theme, many also said that avatar appearance mattered very little. Still, it is safe to say that in some cases avatar presentation plays a role in social interactions in WoW. Many players consider Gnomes and Goblins to be “annoying” and are negatively predisposed towards players of those races. Regardless, the fact that avatars are customizable and do not necessarily reflect your physical appearance allows relationships to be built in World of Warcraft that might never have gotten off the ground in the physical world because of negative preconceptions based on appearance. Avatar customizability contributes to the general sense of accessibility in World of Warcraft, where the biases associated with race and gender can be subverted by simply changing the appearance of an avatar.

## Accessibility

As mentioned earlier in the paper, one of the things that makes WoW appealing to serious gamers is the general sense of maturity in its player base. World of Warcraft is a space in which a player's avatar is not tied in any way to who that player is in the physical world. This means that in some cases WoW offers an opportunity for a player to overcome physical world limitations and level the playing field between him/herself and the other players. For example, female players in WoW can role play a male character and play without any of the bias that they encounter as a woman in the real world. The same is true for minorities and people with disabilities; no-one in WoW is going to care if you are balding or what clothes you wear, because those factors have no impact on your ability to excel in the game. In some cases, WoW even offers an opportunity for players with disabilities to ignore the things that usually impact every aspect of their life. For example, a person who cannot walk has the same capabilities as every other player in the virtual world of Azeroth. There is one woman in BearBlasting who is deaf, and World of Warcraft offers her a space in which she can play as an equal and not feel handicapped by her disability. There are countless examples such as these, which together show that World of Warcraft can be a truly unique space that provides opportunities that the physical world might never accommodate.

World of Warcraft also allows friendships to be built between players who would never have had the chance to become friends in the physical world. Because of WoW, both of the authors have friends all around the world that they would never have had the chance to meet without World of Warcraft. How important the relationships that are formed in WoW are to a given person depends heavily on the person you ask. Many players keep their social circles in WoW and in the physical world completely separate, with only minimal overlap between the two circles, other players play primarily with friends from the physical world, and are quick to blur the lines between in-game friends and physical world friends. Most WoW players do consider their WoW friends to be just as important to them as their physical life friends, and many players have taken steps to meet in the physical world with players that they know from within WoW. World of Warcraft represents just one more way that the interconnectivity provided by the internet makes possible relationships that could not have worked a few generations ago.

## Griefing and Camping

As with most video games, there are always a few players who enjoy harming other players in any way they can, just for kicks. In most games, performing actions that harm other players for no personal benefit is called griefing. There are several ways to grief in WoW, some of which target members of the other faction and some of which target members of the same faction.

The most common form of same-faction griefing comes in the form of killing monsters that a player needs to kill so that there are fewer of the monsters for the player who actually needs them. This is most commonly found in instances where a higher level player is trying to grief a lower level player, because the higher level player can quickly kill a large number of the low level monsters much faster than they can respawn. There are other, less common forms of same-faction griefing as well, such as using a Priest's "life grip" ability to pull another player off of an edge or into an area where they are killed.

The most common form of cross-faction griefing is camping. After a player kills a member of the opposing faction in world PvP, the dead player has to return to his corpse from the nearest graveyard and resurrect. Because a player can only return to life within a certain proximity of where they died, it is possible to wait near the player's corpse until they attempt to resurrect, and then kill them again. Repeatedly killing the same player or group of players over and over is called camping. Usually the motivation for camping another player is out of spite, rather than out of necessity or for personal gain. Camping a player is a lot of waiting and very little actual PvP, and so in most cases players don't have the patience to camp someone for a long time. In certain extreme cases however, players have been camped for so long that they chose to log off and come back to the game later rather than continue trying to make progress while surrounded by members of the other faction.

## Anonymity and its Effects

As mentioned previously in the paper, one of the reasons players are generally mature and etiquette is generally followed in World of Warcraft is that it can be directly harmful to a player to be recognized as someone who is annoying or narrow minded. That being said social pressure can only have so much of an impact in World of Warcraft when there is no physical consequence for virtual breaches of etiquette. This is partially because the nature of punishment for breaches of rules in a virtual space is usually a punishment within that same virtual space, and partially because players have at least some level of anonymity in the virtual world, which disconnects their physical self from their avatar in the virtual space. Gabriella Coleman and Parmy Olson each wrote extensively about the hacker group Anonymous in their works that we read for this course, and in some ways the power that Anonymous gains from being anonymous applies to players in World of Warcraft, as in any virtual space. Coleman writes that Anonymous is empowered by their ability to engage in any way they like online with little to no fear of physical world repercussions, and that one of the driving forces that motivates Anonymous's actions is the idea of 'lulz'. In much the same way, some WoW players greatly enjoy harassing and angering other WoW players "for the lulz", knowing full well that the worst possible repercussions for their actions would be some kind of ban from the game from Blizzard.

Another way that social pressure from other players fails to regulate behavior is when griefing is cross-faction. Because players cannot communicate with one another cross-faction, players on opposing factions are often largely anonymous to one another. While a player would likely refer to someone on their own faction by name, even if they didn't really know the player, it is rare to see players of one faction referring to players of the opposing faction by name. Instead, players often refer to players of the opposing faction by race and class, which further removes the character from the player behind it. Being effectively anonymous to players of the other faction means that a player can grief without fear of any social repercussions, and makes it easier to justify treating players of the opposite faction differently than they would players of the same faction.

# Conclusion

World of Warcraft has many levels of depth to it that most people never take the time to see. Over the course of playing the game for several years and then taking the time to conduct this study, we have come to believe there is a lot of value that can be gained from playing World of Warcraft. The relationships that players form are often of a nature that would not have been possible in the physical world alone, and offer opportunities for players to expand their knowledge of other people, places, and cultures. Many of the skills that are necessary in World of Warcraft are applicable to the physical world; most of the players we interviewed believed that they had gained some amount of social skills and some amount of leadership skills from their time in the game. In addition, to play the game in a serious way often requires a level of dedication and commitment not unlike that which is required to play a team sport, or hold a team-oriented job. World of Warcraft offers players a space to critically think about bettering themselves and the team that they are a part, and allows them to achieve fulfilling goals. It would be difficult to deny that World of Warcraft has been a profoundly positive force in the lives of many players.
